## [Language Mechanics On Escape Analysis][1]

by William Kennedy

May 26, 2017

[1]: https://www.ardanlabs.com/blog/2017/05/language-mechanics-on-escape-analysis.html


### Prelude

This is the second post in a four part series that will provide an
understanding of the mechanics and design behind pointers, stacks,
heaps, escape analysis and value/pointer semantics in Go. This post
focuses on heaps and escape analysis.

Index of the four part series:  
1\) [Language Mechanics On Stacks And
Pointers](https://www.goinggo.net/2017/05/language-mechanics-on-stacks-and-pointers.html)  
2\) [Language Mechanics On Escape
Analysis](https://www.goinggo.net/2017/05/language-mechanics-on-escape-analysis.html)  
3\) [Language Mechanics On Memory
Profiling](https://www.goinggo.net/2017/06/language-mechanics-on-memory-profiling.html)  
4\) [Design Philosophy On Data And
Semantics](https://www.goinggo.net/2017/06/design-philosophy-on-data-and-semantics.html)

### Introduction

In the first post in this four part series, I taught the basics of
pointer mechanics by using an example in which a value was shared down a
goroutine’s stack. What I did not show you is what happens when you
share a value up the stack. To understand this, you need to learn about
another area of memory where values can live: the “heap”. With that
knowledge, you can then begin to learn about “escape analysis”.

Escape analysis is the process that the compiler uses to determine the
placement of values that are created by your program. Specifically, the
compiler performs static code analysis to determine if a value can be
placed on the stack frame for the function constructing it, or if the
value must “escape” to the heap. In Go, there is no keyword or function
you can use to direct the compiler in this decision. It’s only through
the convention of how you write your code that dictates this decision.

### Heaps

The heap is a second area of memory, in addition to the stack, used for
storing values. The heap is not self cleaning like stacks, so there is a
bigger cost to using this memory. Primarily, the costs are associated
with the garbage collector (GC), which must get involved to keep this
area clean. When the GC runs, it will use 25% of your available CPU
capacity. Plus, it can potentially create microseconds of “stop the
world” latency. The benefit of having the GC is that you don’t need to
worry about managing heap memory, which historically has been
complicated and error prone.

Values on the heap constitute memory allocations in Go. These
allocations put pressure on the GC because every value on the heap that
is no longer referenced by a pointer, needs to be removed. The more
values that need to be checked and removed, the more work the GC must
perform on every run. So, the pacing algorithm is constantly working to
balance the size of the heap with the pace it runs at.

### Sharing Stacks

In Go, no goroutine is allowed to have a pointer that points to memory
on another goroutine’s stack. This is because the stack memory for a
goroutine can be replaced with a new block of memory when the stack has
to grow or shrink. If the runtime had to track pointers to other
goroutine stacks, it would be too much to manage and the “stop the
world” latency in updating pointers on those stacks would be
overwhelming.

Here is an example of a stack that is replaced several times because of
growth. Look at the output for lines 2 and 6. You will see the address
of the `string` value inside the stack frame of `main` changes twice.

<https://play.golang.org/p/pxn5u4EBSI>

### Escape Mechanics

Anytime a value is shared outside the scope of a function’s stack frame,
it will be placed (or allocated) on the heap. It’s the job of the escape
analysis algorithms to find these situations and maintain a level of
integrity in the program. The integrity is in making sure that access to
any value is always accurate, consistent and efficient.

Look at this example to learn the basic mechanics behind escape
analysis.

<https://play.golang.org/p/Y_VZxYteKO>

**Listing 1**

    01 package main
    02
    03 type user struct {
    04     name  string
    05     email string
    06 }
    07
    08 func main() {
    09     u1 := createUserV1()
    10     u2 := createUserV2()
    11
    12     println("u1", &u1, "u2", &u2)
    13 }
    14
    15 //go:noinline
    16 func createUserV1() user {
    17     u := user{
    18         name:  "Bill",
    19         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    20     }
    21
    22     println("V1", &u)
    23     return u
    24 }
    25
    26 //go:noinline
    27 func createUserV2() *user {
    28     u := user{
    29         name:  "Bill",
    30         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    31     }
    32
    33     println("V2", &u)
    34     return &u
    35 }

*I am using the `go:noinline` directive to prevent the compiler from
inlining the code for these functions directly in `main`. Inlining would
erase the function calls and complicate this example. I will introduce
the side effects of inlining in the next post.*

In Listing 1, you see a program with two different functions that create
a `user` value and return the value back to the caller. Version 1 of the
function is using value semantics on the return.

**Listing 2**

    16 func createUserV1() user {
    17     u := user{
    18         name:  "Bill",
    19         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    20     }
    21
    22     println("V1", &u)
    23     return u
    24 }

*I said the function is using value semantics on the return because the
`user` value created by this function is being copied and passed up the
call stack. This means the calling function is receiving a copy of the
value itself.*

You can see the construction of a `user` value being performed on lines
17 through 20. Then on line 23, a copy of the `user` value is passed up
the call stack and back to the caller. After the function returns, the
stack looks like this.

**Figure 1**

![](../../../images/goinggo/81_figure1.png)

You can see in Figure 1, a `user` value exists in both frames after the
call to `createUserV1`. In Version 2 of the function, pointer semantics
are being used on the return.

**Listing 3**

    27 func createUserV2() *user {
    28     u := user{
    29         name:  "Bill",
    30         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    31     }
    32
    33     println("V2", &u)
    34     return &u
    35 }

*I said the function is using pointer semantics on the return because
the `user` value created by this function is being shared up the call
stack. This means the calling function is receiving a copy of the
address for the value.*

You can see the same struct literal being used on lines 28 through 31 to
construct a `user` value, but on line 34 the return is different.
Instead of passing a copy of the `user` value back up the call stack, a
copy of the address for the `user` value is passed up. Based on this,
you might think that the stack looks like this after the call.

**Figure 2**

![](../../../images/goinggo/81_figure2.png)

If what you see in Figure 2 was really happening, you would have an
integrity issue. The pointer is pointing down the call stack into memory
that is no longer valid. On the next function call by `main`, that
memory being pointed to is going to be re-framed and re-initialized.

This is where escape analysis begins to maintain integrity. In this
case, the compiler will determine it’s not safe to construct the `user`
value inside the stack frame of `createUserV2`, so instead it will
construct the value on the heap. This will happen immediately during
construction on line 28.

### Readability

As you learned in the last post, a function has direct access to the
memory inside its frame, through the frame pointer, but access to memory
outside its frame requires indirect access. This means access to values
that escape to the heap must be done indirectly through a pointer as
well.

Remember what the code looks like for `createUserV2`.

**Listing 4**

    27 func createUserV2() *user {
    28     u := user{
    29         name:  "Bill",
    30         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    31     }
    32
    33     println("V2", &u)
    34     return &u
    35 }

The syntax is hiding what is really happening in this code. The variable
`u` declared on line 28 represents a value of type `user`. Construction
in Go doesn’t tell you where a value lives in memory, so it’s not until
the `return` statement on line 34, do you know the value will need to
escape. This means, even though `u` represents a value of type `user`,
access to this `user` value must be happening through a pointer
underneath the covers.

You could visualize the stack looking like this after the function call.

**Figure 3**

![](../../../images/goinggo/81_figure3.png)

The `u` variable on the stack frame for `createUserV2`, represents a
value that is on the heap, not the stack. This means using `u` to access
the value, requires pointer access and not the direct access the syntax
is suggesting. You might think, why not make `u` a pointer then, since
access to the value it represents requires the use of a pointer anyway?

**Listing 5**

    27 func createUserV2() *user {
    28     u := &user{
    29         name:  "Bill",
    30         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    31     }
    32
    33     println("V2", u)
    34     return u
    35 }

If you do this, you are walking away from an important readability gain
you can have in your code. Step away from the entire function for a
second and just focus on the `return`.

**Listing 6**

    34     return u
    35 }

What does this `return` tell you? All that it says is that a copy of `u`
is being passed up the call stack. However, what does the `return` tell
you when you use the `&` operator?

**Listing 7**

    34     return &u
    35 }

Thanks to the `&` operator, the `return` now tells you that `u` is being
shared up the call stack and therefore escaping to the heap. Remember,
pointers are for sharing and replace the `&` operator for the word
“sharing” as you read code. This is very powerful in terms of
readability, something you don’t want to lose.

Here is another example where constructing values using pointer
semantics hurts readability.

**Listing 8**

    01 var u *user
    02 err := json.Unmarshal([]byte(r), &u)
    03 return u, err

*You must share the pointer variable with the `json.Unmarshal` call on
line 02 for this code to work. The `json.Unmarshal` call will create the
`user` value and assign its address to the pointer variable.
<https://play.golang.org/p/koI8EjpeIx>*

What does this code say:  
01 : Create a pointer of type `user` set to its zero value.  
02 : Share `u` with the `json.Unmarshal` function.  
03 : Return a copy of `u` with the caller.

It is not obviously clear that a `user` value, which was created by the
`json.Unmarshal` function, is being shared with the caller.

How does readability change when using value semantics during
construction?

**Listing 9**

    01 var u user
    02 err := json.Unmarshal([]byte(r), &u)
    03 return &u, err

What does this code say:  
01 : Create a value of type `user` set to its zero value.  
02 : Share `u` with the `json.Unmarshal` function.  
03 : Share `u` with the caller.

Everything is very clear. Line 02 is sharing the `user` value down the
call stack into `json.Unmarshal` and line 03 is sharing the `user` value
up the call stack back to the caller. This share will cause the `user`
value to escape.

Use value semantics when constructing a value and leverage the
readability of the `&` operator to make it clear how values are being
shared.

### Compiler Reporting

To see the decisions the compiler is making, you can ask the compiler to
provide a report. All you need to do is use the `-gcflags` switch with
the `-m` option on the `go build` call.

*There are actually 4 levels of `-m` you can use, but beyond 2 levels
the information is overwhelming. I will be using the 2 levels of `-m`.*

**Listing 10**

    $ go build -gcflags "-m -m"
    ./main.go:16: cannot inline createUserV1: marked go:noinline
    ./main.go:27: cannot inline createUserV2: marked go:noinline
    ./main.go:8: cannot inline main: non-leaf function
    ./main.go:22: createUserV1 &u does not escape
    ./main.go:34: &u escapes to heap
    ./main.go:34:   from ~r0 (return) at ./main.go:34
    ./main.go:31: moved to heap: u
    ./main.go:33: createUserV2 &u does not escape
    ./main.go:12: main &u1 does not escape
    ./main.go:12: main &u2 does not escape

You can see the compiler is reporting the escape decisions. What is the
compiler saying? First look at the `createUserV1` and `createUserV2`
functions again for reference.

**Listing 13**

    16 func createUserV1() user {
    17     u := user{
    18         name:  "Bill",
    19         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    20     }
    21
    22     println("V1", &u)
    23     return u
    24 }
    
    27 func createUserV2() *user {
    28     u := user{
    29         name:  "Bill",
    30         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    31     }
    32
    33     println("V2", &u)
    34     return &u
    35 }

Start with this line in the report.

**Listing 14**

    ./main.go:22: createUserV1 &u does not escape

This is saying that the function call to `println` inside of the
`createUserV1` function is not causing the `user` value to escape to the
heap. This must be checked because it is being shared with the `println`
function.

Next look at these lines in the report.

**Listing 15**

    ./main.go:34: &u escapes to heap
    ./main.go:34:   from ~r0 (return) at ./main.go:34
    ./main.go:31: moved to heap: u
    ./main.go:33: createUserV2 &u does not escape

These lines are saying, the `user` value associated with the `u`
variable, which is of the named type `user` and assigned on line 31, is
escaping because of the `return` on line 34. The last line is saying the
same thing as before, the `println` call on line 33 is not causing the
`user` value to escape.

Reading these reports can be confusing and can slightly change depending
on whether the type of variable in question is based on a named or
literal type.

Change `u` to be of the literal type `*user` instead of the named type
`user` that it was before.

**Listing 16**

    27 func createUserV2() *user {
    28     u := &user{
    29         name:  "Bill",
    30         email: "bill@ardanlabs.com",
    31     }
    32
    33     println("V2", u)
    34     return u
    35 }

Run the report again.

**Listing 17**

    ./main.go:30: &user literal escapes to heap
    ./main.go:30:   from u (assigned) at ./main.go:28
    ./main.go:30:   from ~r0 (return) at ./main.go:34

Now the report is saying the `user` value referenced by the `u`
variable, which is of the literal type `*user` and assigned on line 28,
is escaping because of the `return` on line 34.

### Conclusion

The construction of a value doesn’t determine where it lives. Only how a
value is shared will determine what the compiler will do with that
value. Anytime you share a value up the call stack, it is going to
escape. There are other reasons for a value to escape which you will
explore in the next post.

What these posts are trying to lead you to is guidelines for choosing
value or pointer semantics for any given type. Each semantic comes with
a benefit and cost. Value semantics keep values on the stack which
reduces pressure on the GC. However, there are different copies of any
given value that must be stored, tracked and maintained. Pointer
semantics place values on the heap which can put pressure on the GC.
However, they are efficient because there is only one value that needs
to be stored, tracked and maintained. The key is using each semantic
correctly, consistently and in balance.

<https://studygolang.com/articles/12444>
